add: AI query optimizer (#105)
aiven/aiven-docs: docs/products/postgresql/howto/optimize-pg-slow-queries.md

---
title: Optimize Aiven for PostgreSQL® slow queries
---

import Insights from "@site/static/images/icons/performance.svg";
import ActionsIcon from "@site/static/images/icons/more.svg";

Optimize slow queries to ensure maximum service performance. Use Aiven's AI capabilities or  `pg_stat_statements` to identify optimization opportunities.

## Artificial intelligence recommendations

Use Aiven's artificial intelligence (AI) capabilities to suggest optimizations to
your databases and queries.

Aiven considers various aspects to suggest optimization, for example query
structure, table size, existing indexes and their cardinality, column types and
sizes, the connections between the tables and columns in the query.

### Display optimization recommendations

To optimize a query:

1. In the [Aiven Console](https://console.aiven.io/login), open your Aiven for PostgreSQL service.
1. Click <Insights className="icon"/> **AI insights**.
1. For the query of your choice, click **Optimize**.

>    A window displays the query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The **Query optimization report** window opens and shows an optimization suggestion in the **New optimized query** section.
```

Author: Let's bring this up to a team sync. This very "DITA" approach is a time sink for little value in our case, we need to find ways to go faster, and skipping this kind of result step is an easy pick.

Reviewer: Sure, let's do that :-) Just or the record, this is not a result step coz it says `For the query of your choice, click **Optimize**.`. And only afterwards, there is a comment you added `A window displays the query.` (still in the same step). What I proposed, I just suggested making your comment more detailed.

Reviewer: I modified my suggestion for the sake of conciseness and simplicity but still a bit more meaningful I hope.

> 1. In the **Query optimization report** window, see the optimization suggestion.

Reviewer: This step is not actionable, let's remove it. The info included in this step is moved to the commentary to the previous step.

   <!-- :::note
   - To display alternative optimization recommendations, click **Advanced options**.
   - To display the diff view, click **Query diff**.
   - To display explanations about the optimization, click **optimization details**.
   ::: -->

> 1. To apply the suggestion, run the SQL queries provided in the window.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. To apply the suggestion, run the SQL queries provided in the **New optimized query** section.
```

title: Optimize PostgreSQL® slow queries
---

import Insights from "@site/static/images/icons/performance.svg";
import ActionsIcon from "@site/static/images/icons/more.svg";

Optimize slow queries to ensure maximum service performance. Use Aiven's AI capabilities or  `pg_stat_statements` to identify optimization opportunities.

## Artificial intelligence recommendations

> Use Aiven's artificial intelligence capabilities to suggest optimizations to

Author: I'm just unsure of how "ai" will come out in the search hits until we go live and reindex, we'll have to see and then we'll know whether the acronym is fine to use more regularly :)

your databases and queries.

Aiven considers various aspects to suggest optimization, for example query
structure, table size, existing indexes and their cardinality, column types and
sizes, the connections between the tables and columns in the query.

### Display optimization recommendations

To optimize a query:

1. In the [Aiven Console](https://console.aiven.io/login), open your PostgreSQL service.

> 1. Click <Insights className="icon"/> **AI insights**.

Author: Good catch but we do want the lower case version, i'll update the Console instead 👍

> 1. Click <Insights className="icon"/> **AI insights**.

Reviewer: Yes, 100%, only flagging for (in)consistency awareness :-)

> 1. For the query of your choice, click **Optimize**.

Reviewer: Well, I checked your path and for me it doesn't work in dev-sandbox. Does it work for you?
`clicking "Optimize" (next to the query name) doesn't allow to follow up and click "Optimize" again. It only allows to preview "Query optimization report".`

> 1. For the query of your choice, click **Optimize**.

Author: Oh I see, line 26. Fixed 👍

   A window displays the query. Click **Optimize**.
1. In the **Query optimization report** window, see the optimization suggestion.

   <!-- :::note
   - To display alternative optimization recommendations, click **Advanced options**.
   - To display the diff view, click **Query diff**.
   - To display explanations about the optimization, click **optimization details**.
   ::: -->

1. To apply the suggestion, run the SQL query provided in the window.

## Manual optimizations

> PostgreSQL® gives you the ability to [identify slow queries](/docs/products/postgresql/howto/identify-pg-slow-queries) using the `pg_stat_statements` view. The following article

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aiven for PostgreSQL allows you to [identify slow queries](/docs/products/postgresql/howto/identify-pg-slow-queries) using the `pg_stat_statements` view. To improve slow running queries, use one of the manual optimization techniques.
```

contains several common optimization techniques to improve slow running

> queries.

Reviewer: Remove plz
